.. title: HF for misers
.. slug: hf-for-misers
.. date: 2013/05/21 10:01:50
.. tags: 
.. link: 
.. description: HF ham rigs for cheap


Getting on the air has to be the ultimate goal for any new ham radio operator,
like myself.  With the advent of inexpensive dual-band handheld transceivers
for VHF and UHF, it is easy to get on the two meter and 70 centimeter ham
bands.  The lower frequency ham bands, known collectively as high frequency
(HF) are a different story.  So far, cheap Chinese radios have not appeared
for these frequency ranges, and basic radios sell for $500-$700 new.  For many
people who are just getting into ham radio, this is cost prohibitive. Or maybe
someone with experience on VHF/UHF just doesn't want to spend that much to try
something new.

What to Buy
-----------

.. figure:: ../kenwoodts520se.jpg
    :scale: 50
    :alt: Kenwood TS-520SE

    A 30 year old Kenwood TS-520SE in excellent working condition

For the cheap new ham, a used radio is an ideal solution to this problem.
There are numerous models of very nice older radios from the major brands:
Icom, Yaesu, Kenwood, TenTec, etc.  It can be difficult to keep all of the
model numbers straight, but the reviews at `eHam.net
<http://www.eham.net/reviews/>`_ can be a good way to get oriented to a model
you aren't familiar with.  I usually just `google the model number
<http://google.com/?q=Kenwood+TS520SE>`_ and the eHam reviews are usually
among the first few results.

WB0NNI has `an interesting suggestion
<http://wb0nni.dakotamade.com/firstrig.html>`_ to consider a particular type
of radio from the later 1970s and early 1980s.  In the process of
transitioning from vacuum tube to solid state radios, manufacturers produced a
group of "hybrid" radios that had solid state signal paths but used vacuum
tubes for the final amplification stage in the transmitter.  As detailed
on that page, there are a number of advantages to these hybrid rigs, including
the robustness of the tube output stages and the wide availability of
replacement parts due to the ubiquity of these models.

The picture above shows the Kenwood TS-520SE that I bought from its original
owner.  It is old in years, but it is in excellent condition.  It works well
on all of the frequency bands that is has (160m, 80m, 40m, 20m, 15m, 10m) and
had a receiver that many people compare favorably with much more expensive
newer models.  An additional advantage of these oder radios is the relative
simplicity of their controls.  There are still plenty of switches and knobs
and I've read through the manual multiple times and still need some reminding,
but this is a far cry from the button-filled faceplates of the `newest radios
<http://www.universal-radio.com/catalog/hamhf/3990.html>`_.


Where to Buy
------------

You can either buy a used radio face-to-face at a hamfest or perhaps from
someone in your local club, or you can buy online.  (I haven't been to any
hamfests, so I won't comment, except to say that commenters online highly
recommend this option because you can see that the radio works.)  Online, you
have two main options for buying used transceivers: eBay and dedicated ham
radio sales sites.

My radio came from a listing on `QRZ.com
<http://forums.qrz.com/forumdisplay.php?7-Ham-Radio-Gear-For-Sale>`_ whose
"For Sale" section has many new items listed every day.  It took a bit of
waiting for something in my price range to come up, but someone is selling
something in the $250-$400 price range a couple of times a week.  Another site
with ham radio gear for sale by hams is `QTH.com <http://swap.qth.com/>`_,
with some people posting the same items to both sites.

eBay is the other big source of used radios, but as with all things sold on
that site, there are a number of provisos.  First, you will often be buying a
radio from someone who does not know anything about it.  Maybe they got it at
an estate sale, or from a dead relative, but chances are they don't know
enough to evaluate its condition.  Sometimes you do find hams or dealers
selling used radios, but that isn't always the case.  Second, items generally
go for their market price on eBay.  There are so many buyers looking at the
auctions, that the price paid for an item is generally at or above what it is
worth.  So, if you see something going very cheaply on eBay, beware!  There is
probably some reason that the market has set the price where it is.

.. figure:: ../ts520keydown.jpg
    :scale: 50
    :alt: TS-520SE 100 watts key down on 80 meters

    TS-520SE showing 100 watts into a dummy load on 80 meters.

Risks and Rewards
-----------------

Buying a used radio is not without its risks and its rewards.  If there was an
option for new radios in the $200-$400 price range, I think it would make
sense for new hams to start there, but that segment of the new market is
non-existent (for now).  If that is how much you can afford to spend, then you
will need to be savvy about purchasing a used radio.  You might end up with
something that doesn't work, needs fixing, or as someone in a recent online
discussion said, something that you spend all of your time dinking with.

On the other hand, you will be putting these radios to good use.  Many older
hams have moved on to new radios and don't ever use these older, basic, yet
full functional radios.  Also, you will learn a great deal from the process of
evaluating and possibly repairing your radio.  You can know an older, simpler
radio much more deeply than you can the latest computerized gear.  From
replacing burnt-out components to possibly modifying or improving what you
bought, you will get solid electronics experience from a radio of this
vintage.

For a cheap new ham, a used hybrid radio could be just the right choice.
